I've try to remove the kind of taboo or
the negative associations we have with a
word like power or with the word
ambition you know I try and say ambition
is a good thing it means that you have
you believe in yourself you you you have
some self-love and you believe you're
worth something and you want to go out
and Achieve and and create something
worthwhile for other people so ambition
is a is a positive thing but so many
people are just kind of embarrassed
about being a human being embarrassed
about our Prim nature embarrassed about
our own aggressive impulses this is
partly why boys are failing in our
schools now at a disproportionate rate
you know the the and I see this there's
an assault of the sort that you're
describing on the better part of
striving masculinity and you know I had
a friend who killed himself because he
identified his ambition with you know
the the the patriarchal Force that's
devouring the environment let's say and
that's a con that's you know the cause
of of hisor IAL horror and you might say
well no one takes that on to themselves
to that degree and that's well you can
say that but that you just don't know
what the hell you're talking about
people take that on to themselves all
the
[Music]
time hi everyone I'm pleased today to to
have with me Mr Robert Green Mr Green is
the number one New York Times
bestselling author of number of books
the 48 Laws of Power 1998 The Art of
Seduction 2001 the 33 Strategies of War
2007 the 50th law which he wrote with 50
Cent the rapper 2008 Mastery 2012 the
laws of human nature 2018 and the daily
laws this book right
here
so he's
an he's an internationally renowned
expert on power strategies living in Los
Angeles Mr Green worked at an estimated
80 jobs including magazine editor
construction worker Hollywood movie
writer before becoming an author the
Sunday Times referred to his first book
the 48 Laws of Power as the Hollywood
backstabbers Bible and it can be
difficult to find people who acknowledge
its influence because of its
controversial nature I was reading the
daily laws before setting up this
interview and I'm going to read one uh
it's a it's a set of meditations 366
meditations on power seduction Mastery
strategy and human nature and so here's
the one for June 7th and I think it's
relatively
representative of the book June 7th
never impune people's
intelligence then there's a subtitle uh
or an introdu Rory idea the best way to
be well received by all is to clothe
yourself in the skin of the dumbest of
brutes balasar
graian the feeling that someone else is
more intelligent than we are is almost
always intolerable we usually try to
justify it in different ways quote he
only has book knowledge whereas I have
real
knowledge quote her parents paid for her
to get a good education if my parents
had had as much money if I had been as
privileged
he's not as smart as he
thinks last but not least quote she may
know her narrow little field better than
I do but beyond that she's really not
smart at all even Einstein was a boob
outside physics given how important the
idea of intelligence is to most people's
vanity it is critical never
inadvertently to insult or impune a
person's brain power this is an
unforgivable sin but if you can make
this iron rule work for you it opens up
all sorts of avenues of decep ction the
feeling of intellectual superiority you
give them will disarm their suspicion
muscles and then daily
law subliminally reassure people that
they are more intelligent than you are
or even that you are a bit of a [__]
and you can run rings around
them and this is the 48 Laws of Power
from the 48 Laws of Power law 21 play a
sucker to catch a sucker seem dumber
than your mark So when I Was preparing
for this I was reading these daily um
these daily meditations and I was
actually shocked I was really quite
shocked by them I was shocked by that
one and I was very unclear as a
consequence as to your motivations and
so I was thinking do I want do I want to
I don't get this I don't understand this
exactly it's like this is very deceptive
and then I talked to my team who like
your books a lot and and my daughter who
really liked interviewing you and I
thought well there's something going on
here that I don't quite understand
understand which is certainly possible
and then I thought well this is maybe a
shadow exploration something like that
and and then I thought like I was kind
of a dimwit for not catching that
earlier but so but you know it is
shocking these are very manipulative uh
laws let's say and so can you guide me
through the rationale for producing
material like that what what were you
trying what are you trying to do with
your books and they've obviously been
misunderstood it says in the in
Wikipedia Green's books are sometimes
described as manipulative and amoral and
so clear this up for me well you know
that it's a it's a bit manipulative when
people write that because a great deal
of the 48 Laws of Power I'd say you know
maybe two-thirds of them are not
manipulative have nothing to do with
deception they have things to do with
kind of Common Sense ideas about power
such as such as being generous with
people such as creating compelling
spectacles such as entering action with
boldness and kind of how you present
yourself sort of things about your image
and your appearance but there are
definitely some laws that are quite
manipulative and then my other books
don't really go into things like that so
it is a bit of a distortion to write
that but where this comes from is
basically um I have a particular idea of
power so maybe I should explain that a
little bit my idea of power it's not
about this kind of grand thing of
political or War something it's on a
very individual level and the idea for
me comes from from n and his idea of the
will to power which he explains as all
every organism has a desire to expand
itself as a desire for expansion and so
I think that for human beings the desire
that we we have this innate um
propensity for wanting to expand beyond
our limits we want to
feel like we have some degree of ability
to influence other people that we can
control our own career and learn more
and develop greater skills and have more
kind of power and influence in our life
the feeling that I cannot have any power
or influence over my children my spouse
my colleagues my boss my career in
general is deeply deeply unsettling for
the human animal and causes all kinds of
attempts at but I call negative power
passive aggression Etc setting yourself
up as a victim kind of L leverage power
in a negative way and so the problem is
um and this a lot of this comes from
makel who inspired a lot of the 48 Laws
the problem is that we live in a world
where this desire for some kind of power
buts up against kind of codes of
behavior that have gotten stricter and
stricter and stricter in in particularly
in the 21st century about what is
acceptable about what is politically
correct so we're supposed to appear to
be these Paragons of virtue these
Paragons of fairness and democracy Etc
at the same time we're all trying to
angle for different degrees of power in
our work in our relationships Etc and so
because of that Dynamic we have to be
extremely careful in this world and I
compare it to the courts of like Louis
the
14th where all of the courtiers if
they're too overt in their power moves
the King will disapprove of them and
will not banish them but they'll be kind
of excluded to the corner of the palace
and so the game was to be sort of
indirect to be polite and ingratiating
and if you had an enemy to know how to
kind of very quietly get rid of them and
so this is kind of what I what what
where the 48 Laws of Power came out from
so you quoted me I had like 80 different
JS probably more like 60
65 but I saw all kinds of very
deceptive games being played continually
in the various different jobs I had and
I I worked in every conceivable field
and I didn't see any kind of honesty
about this dynamic in the human world
and it really kind of irritated me all
the self-help books were sort of um
describing a world that I never saw
existed you know I saw people being very
political having Egos and having
problems with their egos and I didn't
see any but any books like they're kind
of describing what I had encountered
every day so law number one is never
outshine the master and the idea is that
if you try too hard to impress your boss
or the person above you you're liable to
make them feel insecure you're going to
trip on their ego and something bad will
happen to you right and so this seemed
like the fact that people have egos and
operate with Egos and you have to be
careful with them seems very clear to me
but I didn't find books out there that
were describing it so I hope this kind
of gives you an idea a little bit of the
context where the book came out yeah
well the okay so I just I I can't
remember who sent me this U I think it
was Clay routage yeah I think that's
right he just sent me a survey that this
organization he works with has completed
stating that something like 40% of
Millennials don't feel they have any
control over their life right so that is
related to the first issue that you
brought up and and you you obviously
consider that uh problematic and you
said that well we need to it's good for
us to have some control over our
Destinies and also to feel that that's a
possibility to see it at least as a goal
and and then and that if if we feel
consciously thwarted in that goal or
believe that it's impossible that
doesn't mean we're going to give up our
striving it means it's going to go
underground and then it's going to
manifest itself in all sorts of
deceptive ways exactly and then you you
said that you were interested in n's
idea of Will To Power as in some sense
the central motivating uh the central
motivation of of the organism yeah
across species to some degree
um and and then you talked about the
jobs that you've had so why why did so I
got that right I hope I I hope I've got
that very well thank you okay okay and
so and so to some degree and then you
said well you had all these jobs and you
found that people were engaged in
manipulative and deceptive strategies a
fair number of a fair amount of the time
and that no one was really warning
people about this are delineating out
the strategies yeah okay so that you
know that seems to me to be reasonable
that I mean I'm a big admirer of the
work of Carl Yung which everyone
listening to this knows more than they
even want to know um and he was
certainly
sensitive to the idea that people had a
terrible Shadow yes that they would
clothe themselves in the GU garments of
moral virtue right and act out a
virtuous persona but because of the
thwarted will to strive in some sense
that they have all sorts of motivations
sexual power related dominance um
aggression anger resentment that aren't
admitted thoroughly and that are snakes
under the carpet or elephants under the
rug or skeletons in the closet and they
pollute human relationships and I
certainly believe that's true I believe
that that that's the corruption of Human
Relationships by a form of of severe
deceit and I also think it's reasonable
to warn people against that and also to
alert them to the fact that such things
operate in their own Souls I guess what
I wonder is so then the last thing I'm
confused about to some degree is
you had 65 jobs how come so many
jobs I was a very restless young man um
it doesn't speak very well of me and the
fact that I couldn't hold a job for more
than 11 months I I came out of college
and I wanted to be a writer and I had
all kinds of romantic Notions of what
that meant and then I entered journalism
and I worked in New York and I didn't
find that that was a very good fit so I
moved to Europe and I wandered around
for four or five years writing trying to
write novels and working in hotels doing
construction kind of the writer's life
where the the the variety of experiences
were kind of giving me
material and I couldn't I never was
really happy in in overtly political
environments to be honest with you I'm
kind of a a born entrepreneur I like
working for myself I didn't like a lot
of the games that were being played and
I'm not very good at them I mean I've
gotten better at it but a lot of the
things that I write about in the 48 Laws
of Power such as never outshine the
master are things that I did poorly I
did wrong and I suffered for them so I
understand the kind of the pain that a
lot of people have in the Work World
which is sort of hard for a lot of other
people who don't have that kind of
experience to understand how deeply
frustrating it can be when you have a
job that you're not satisfied with and
so I was someone who's very restless and
I never felt comfortable in any of the
different jobs I had and I was also
trying to broaden my experience
okay so so I had a lot of jobs when I
was a kid I worked as a oh God I worked
as
a uh in a garage pumping gas I worked as
a dishwasher for years I was a short
order cook I re tip drill bits I worked
as a beekeeper um I had a lot of oh I
worked in a plywood Mill uh running
plywood pieces through a huge dryer we
used to try to light the thing on fire
it was like a block long this dryer
fired by natural gas if you worked
really hard you could stuff it so full
it would get crammed up in the middle
then it would light on fire and all the
the fire uh um sprinklers would kick in
and then the whole building which was
like a block Square would fill up with
steam really oh God so anyways I I
worked in a lot of jobs and and so but I
didn't so this is something that that's
worth getting clear I like the jobs a
lot almost all of them not all of them
but almost all of them I got along with
the people that I was working with I
didn't have the same exactly the same
experience that you're describing and
yeah you said that you said that you had
a harder time I don't know exactly was
it fitting in you didn't like overt the
overt political elements too and like
when I worked in restaurants I didn't
really experience that you know like I
got along with the guys that I was
working with there was a lot of joking
around I I and it's not like I like
political maneuvering when I got in the
university and saw people in
bureaucracies particular maneuvering
politically to attain dominance just I
found it I I find it absolutely
appalling that underground power
struggle but it sounds like it sounds
like you had a harder time maybe than I
did adapting and that maybe is and that
became a conscious puzzle for you is
that a reasonable way of thinking about
it I think so it made me explore think
about myself like maybe I'm doing
something wrong the natural reac action
in these situations where things you
know it wasn't that I hated all of my
jobs some of them were fun so I don't
want to give the wrong impression but
when mistakes were made and I it maybe
inadvertently made my boss or someone
feel insecure it caused me like months
later to kind of question what had
happened and maybe something I did that
was wrong in that environment and so um
you know I I I felt it wasn't that I
felt uncomfortable but I felt sometimes
that trying so hard or being good at my
job which was often the case was often a
detriment which was a very strange
realization well that's that's a really
good sign that you need to go get a
different job I mean I worked with
clinical clients a a lot you know in
career counseling and my sense one of
the things we'd analyzed right away was
well can you actually do your job well
and be recognized for it and have a
pathway to something approximating
success or are you around truly toxic
people who will punish you for your
virtues in which case well let's get
your CV together you know let's get you
prepared to get the hell out of there
and find a place where you can actually
Thrive I mean I had clients who were
trapped in jobs I remember one client in
particular she uh she had been a refugee
from Albania Eastern Europe that was a
rough damn country man and then she came
yeah yeah like the worst of the Eastern
European block countries in terms of
poverty and and general oppressiveness
and then she came over to North America
and got educated and she ended up
working in a bank in Canada and like she
was good at her job and she was smart
and the her managers just hated her and
like she sent me an email string one day
it was about 30 emails long that her
manager had put together where the
bureaucrats in the bank were discussing
whether or not they were allowed anymore
to use the word flip
chart I think they replaced it with
easel board or some damn thing well the
reason for that was flip had been used
at some point hypothetically as an
epithet for Filipino people and so it
was it was Politically Incorrect and it
was just I mean she was just being
driven mad by this this kind of what
would you call it pointless moral
posturing she was a sensible person and
questioned a lot of the bureaucratic
stupidity so right my goal in situations
like that was to help people figure out
how to move laterally and find a place
where you know their virtues would be
rewarded instead of punished right it's
very wise you know if it can be managed
my experience is um and what I I wanted
to help people with 48 law of power when
these things kind of happen you get very
confused and they create a kind of
trauma in your life where you sometimes
blame yourself or you wonder maybe you
did something wrong and you become a
little bit skittish and you you you get
a little bit afraid in your next job and
these things things kind of Linger on in
your mind so having some clarity I don't
want to make people paranoid in reading
these books I make it very clear that
that's not the point I want you to be
very realistic but the idea that you
could have some clarity that maybe what
really happened is that I inadvertently
triggered the insecurities of this boss
or maybe there are these strict kind of
moral puritanical codes in place and I
somehow violated them it's not my fault
that kind of clarity can be very very ow
ing I find in that that's another kind
of motivating device behind the 48 Laws
well you also make me very curious about
your personality I mean when I'm talking
I'm sorry I'm gonna yeah well you know
I'm a that's okay I'm a clinician and I
snap into that mode sometimes and I'm
very curious about this conversation I
mean you have a very gentle demeanor and
a very uh soft and kind voice and yeah
you you don't look like a harsh person
and so one of the one of the dimensions
one of the Cardinal personality
Dimensions there's of them you may know
this
extroversion which is a positive emotion
and it's associated with assertiveness
and enthusiasm yeah and Trump is
extroverted definitely negative emotion
that's neuroticism and that's the whole
panoply of negative emotions they all
Clump together and people differ in
their sensitivity to them
agreeableness that's compassion and
politeness on the high end and more like
bluntness and competitiveness on the
other end and conscientiousness and
openness which is creativity you're
obviously high in openness you're
entrepreneur you're a writer you're
interested in ideas you're obviously
creative but you strike me as someone
who's very high in agreeableness
compassion that's compassion and
politeness is that a reasonable is that
a reasonable I think that's fair I think
that's fairly spot on I would I couldn't
have fought fun yeah I agree with you on
that certainly okay okay so I mean I
mean people are a little more complex
than that I do have other sides to
myself I do have a shadow side that is
can be very aggressive and very I'm very
competitive so it's I think on the
surface I have that kind of agreeable
personality for various reasons but yes
would you describe yourself as
compassionate empathetic very much so
yeah okay so here's what I'm okay okay
okay so that's I'm very curious about
that
because one of the disadvantages of
being high in agreeableness is that
you're more likely to be a target for
disagreeable types certainly and this is
a really important notion so I was
talking yesterday who was it
with I can't remember but we were
talking about oh yes it was Andy no we
were talking about the establishment of
this you know Utopian community in the
middle of Seattle the the mayor
described it and said well maybe it'll
be the summer of love which is extremely
naive thing to think especially because
the Summer of Love blew up and so and
you know that's sort of a celebration of
agreeable virtues and so agreeable
people are very generous and kind and
they're not backstabbing and they're
empathetic and they're self-sacrificing
and and but there have been computer
simulations very sophisticated computer
simulations by evolutionary biologists
of what happens if you get agreeable
people together so imagine you have a
population of people and all of them are
agreeable and so they're cooperating
away it's all very kind and nice but if
you put one person in there who has
psychopathic traits yes he just takes
over everything yeah and so the
agreeable people always have the problem
of how do you handle Free Riders
cheaters and Psychopaths and you know
you might be utopian and say well those
people just don't exist and they
shouldn't exist and we shouldn't
structure our societies that way but
that ain't going to cut it because
psychopaths are always 3% of the
population they veryy begin five and so
if you're so so is it possible I don't
want to push this interpret Beyond its
reasonable limits but I'm I'm wondering
you're you're open and creative and
entrepreneurial and so that's not going
to suit you for managerial or
bureaucratic jobs you don't have the
temperament for that and then you're
agreeable and so is it possible that you
encountered more of that bullying
Behavior or like a disproportionate
amount of that bullying behavior and so
forth in the jobs that you had is that I
think that's very possible and yes and
I'm also very sensitive so I'm kind of
you know react a little bit more than
most most other people might react but
the odd thing is is that the book came
out in
1998 and it has resonated with lots and
lots of readers I've sold millions of
copies of the book and so there's I
think a lot of people share the trait
that I have oh there's no doubt about it
that that's it's not uncommon what I'm
talking about at all I mean the the
great manipulators in the world the
three% that you talk about and I think
that's about the right number they don't
need this kind of book because they're
born that way or they're not born that
way but they learned at the age of three
or four or five how to begin to
manipulate and their whole personality
was kind of formed over these sort of
tactics they don't need a book like that
what seems to happen there we studied
that you know so if you take
two-year-olds and you group them
together two-year-olds by the way
grouped together are the most violent of
human beings in age matched groups okay
so among two years two-year-olds there's
a proportion of them who will
spontaneously kick fight hit by and
steel they're almost all males and it's
about 5% of the males now most of them
this goes to nature versus nurtur say
most of them get socialized out of that
by the time they're four now they would
be more disagreeable boys so they're not
empathic and compassionate polite by
temperament but they can still be
socialized but a proportion of them
don't get socialized and they tend to be
life course antisocial types yeah I
think um Melanie Klein she looked at
infants like that of that age and she
said that there was something called the
greedy baby and the greedy baby was like
sucking the mother's breast so hard it
could never get enough milk it was just
so greedy for more and more and she saw
that as the child got older that kind of
greediness and that kind of selfish
behavior only got worse and worse and
worse and she would like try and see if
you could track that to someone who got
who became older was a type and she
ended up thinking that there was maybe a
genetic component to oh yeah well there
is a genetic component too because that
sort of proclivity runs in families but
and also there's a genetic underpinning
to variation and agreeableness now you
know if you have a tough kid like that
and you're very agreeable the kid can
run rough shot over you it's very
difficult for you to do the
socialization and so like one of the one
of the problems that women face with men
so men are reliably less agreeable than
women that's cross culturally and it's
true it's even more true in egalitarian
societies and so women have to agreeable
because I think primarily because they
have to take care of infants and that's
an extremely self-sacrificing occupation
especially when they're under 9 months
but with men they have to select men who
are agreeable enough to be generous and
kind and share but they have to be
disagreable enough to keep the real
psychopaths and the and the manipulators
at Bay and so it's a chronic problem for
the human race okay so you're you're
doing all these jobs and you're seeing
the politicking and politicking and it's
not going well for you you decide to
analyze the behavior of the people that
are acting in these underground
oppressive ways you're definitely going
to see that if if you're if you're being
pushed around a lot you know and so you
decided to make that an object of
study yeah um you know I wasn't it's not
so much that I was pushed around some of
it was also just observing how other
people were being treated I have this
idea that I talk about in the book that
you know people will always wear the the
mask of being agreeable and friendly
even the most psychotic boss will always
know how to be somewhat charming and
present themselves but you look at how
they treat other people when you're not
observing them behind closed doors and
that's when some of their ugly Behavior
will come out they kind of hide it very
well from from from the public so a lot
of it was observing how other people
were mistreated and so when I worked in
Hollywood you know in some Industries I
have to say some Industries are a lot
worse than others so when you're working
at that factory job that you're
mentioning people will tend to be kind
of United around a single purpose there
won't be me much politic and going on an
environment an environment where
Hollywood so much of it is money and ego
Etc the level and the desire for fame
you know and that's going to attract a
disproportionate number so it's the
people that are are more likely to be
the way that you describe are high in
extroversion yes especially
assertiveness and they're low in
agreeableness that's kind of the
personality disorder axis high in
extroverted assertiveness and low in
agreeableness especially compassion and
then if you add unconscientious to that
you got you got someone who's bordering
on Psychopathic right and they could
still be high in openness they could
still be creative and intelligent but
they'd be manipulative as hell and kous
and and and I would say another thing I
was going to ask you is because you
worked in Hollywood and that is a a
place that that invites people who want
to be to make a display of themselves
let's say and and there's some utility
in that right we want to people to be
actors we want them to be enthusiastic
and entertaining yes but but it's so do
you is it possible that a lot of this
you saw was a consequence of the form of
Industry that you were involved in
especially in Hollywood well definitely
but um after the book came out U my
first book the 48 Laws it became hugely
popular popular in the hip-hop world
among musicians which is why I ended up
doing a book with 50 Cent and I found
out that the music industry was even
worse than Hollywood and then I was in
Washington for a book tour for the 48
Laws and this woman came running up to
me who worked in voice of Americans she
was saying you have no idea how the the
48 Laws of Power exactly describe the
environment I'm in and then I was in a
conference with people who were in um
nonprofits in San Diego and this woman
was saying boy you describe the
nonprofit work politically it is so so
perfectly it is so political it's so
much about ego so it's horrible but
that's true of the nonprofit world you
know I mean that might have to do with
that moral posturing e well I the way I
look at it is you had a place like the
Soviet Union where your degree of power
wasn't based on any kind of Statistics
it wasn't that you perform better than
others it wasn't that your brand your
economic Branch was was outperforming
others and therefore you were elevated
to a higher position it was pure
politicking it was pure manipulation how
close could you get to the hierarchy
maneuvering yeah so when you have like a
nonprofit world where it's not based on
money or or or or um you know results
it's more on it's you get very political
environments like that where there's no
kind of quantification of what what one
is doing Superior work than others yeah
you know I talked to um
um Woodridge wridge Adrien wridge and he
wrote some books on the history of
meritocracy and they're very very
interesting he writes for The Economist
and he so you know that the idea of
meritocracy is under assault now I think
the idea of Merit per se is under
assault and what wridge has done was
look at how societies were structured in
the absence of the meritocratic ethos
and so that's in the absence of a belief
that there is such a thing as productive
competence and he talked about nepotism
which by the way Psychopaths practice
nepotism they're not only selfish they
they do differentially benefit their
immediate kin and and hereditary
aristocracy so if you don't have
meritocracy and if your hierarchies
aren't predicated on competence you
don't get a UT a non-competitive Utopia
not NEP yeah exactly you get nepotism
and and this political infighting and
that is like it's no wonder that affect
you cuz that's that's absolutely toxic
it it's just sickening and it does
produce a situation where the worst
people can the worst people torture the
people who are competent for their
competence it's really ugly yeah and and
uh you know when I came out of
University I went to University of
Wisconsin and I had you know my degree
in Classics and literature Etc you know
I wasn't expecting this I expected that
the harder you tried the more the better
your the work that you produced the more
you tried to you know get results That's
What mattered right and then to suddenly
be blindsided this because nobody in our
culture in tells young people that this
is what the world is going to be like
and that's s sort of a lot of where this
book came out of I wrote it when I was
38 39 so I was already a bit older but
your parents don't prepare you for this
schools don't prepare you for this
University certainly doesn't prepare you
for in fact it lead you to believe the
opposite and so you enter the world Work
World and if you're entering a place
more like what we're describing here not
like what you were describing some of
the jobs you had you're you're
blindsided you had no preparation for it
nothing prepared you for it and you
don't know how to react well you know if
if you're naive in that manner two
things happen and I was naive yeah one
is that you're much more likely to be
exploited that definitely happens the
other thing is you're much more likely
to be traumatized because you trauma
sort of occurs in proportion to how much
of your belief it it demolishes and so
if you have a a too positive and too
naive view of the world and you
especially if you encounter someone
malevolent they can really do you in
psychologically yeah and and they often
will too because well they have their
their reasons and
so
yeah yeah I can remember um I I had a
job in journalism and I wrote this
article um about Italy and I thought it
was a great article and then the editor
um brought me in for lunch and he was he
was like having his second or third
martini and he started to tell me that
Robert you're never going to be a writer
you don't have the discipline for it
you're just too wild you don't
communicate to the reader Etc you need
to get out of this business it's not for
you it was very painful and then in
looking back in it I think he had set me
up for this I think that he was had kind
of commissioned this article knowing
that it was going to have some problems
with it Etc and he was deliberately
setting me up in this situation so that
he and I think a lot of it came from
Envy you know en is a bad one and envy
and resentment man those are corrosive
it they're they're they're soul and
culture destroying emotions you know
when I worked with my clients we talked
a lot about resentment a lot and I I I
had kind of an axom which is well if
you're resentful there's only one two
things going on one is you're whiny and
neurotic and it's time to grow the hell
up and take some responsibility and so
you got to ask yourself that and the
second is someone is taking advantage of
you and you have something to say or do
that you're not saying or doing and so
we try to sort out which of those it was
and then if it was that they had
something to say or do to stand up for
themselves for example then we' just
strategize like mt so I had one client
for example I really liked her she was
smart man uh very very very competent
honest hardworking conscientious
diligent attractive lawyer and uh she'd
moved firms and those firms can be
pretty Cutthroat you know they're full
of prosecutors what do you expect right
right right and and and one guy when she
went into the firm basically swiped her
biggest client through a series of
manipulative actions right and you know
kind of lulled her into a false sense of
security sort of started to cooperate
with her and then shunted her out and
then when Sheed started to complain
about it he started Distributing R
rumors that she had mental health issues
and and oh it was absolutely awful so we
spent about six months strategizing how
to deal with him and so it was
successful you know and then I love
doing that sort of thing it was such fun
helping people who
are I yeah I do the same thing as well
yeah I'm sorry so why do you think this
was so popular oh you said the music
industry was particularly pathological
at least this is the reports you got so
why do you why do you think that is do
you have any theories about that and
then why do you think your books got to
be so popular among well rappers say uh
why do you think it it the music
industry is the way it is or yeah I mean
I mean do you think there's something
specific about that industry that lends
itself to that kind of cor yes and and
and I've had a lot of um people give me
the same kind of feedback there's a lot
of money around right huge amounts of
money around and um and people are
producers of Music are very M they have
a very exploitative kind of model of
business which is they they seduce a
firsttime artist with a with a lot of
money but the contract is and eventually
they own all of the work etc so it was a
very exploitive business model
particularly for africanamerican
musicians who were historically very
exploited and so it's it's like
Hollywood where so much of it is about
pleasing people and having the right
demeanor so so 50 c who I wrote the book
with he said you know he he dealt crack
on the streets of Southside Queens you
know he's was a hustler at the age of
nine he saw everything but nothing
prepared him for the kind of mellan
games that music industry people would
play you want to take take a
straightforward criminal over a
psychopathic manipulator any day yeah
yeah exactly well and you talked about
money like I'd rather deal with someone
greedy like honestly greedy than someone
manipulative underground politic or
because at least with the greed well you
can negotiate with someone like that you
know what they want they're kind of
dimensional and you might have your
moral qualms about it but I still I
think that's partly why I'm an admirer
of capitalism it's like greed is not the
worst of the vices by any stretch of the
imagination no no I agree with you on
that and so you know why are my books
popular I think there's a it's a
combination of things first of all I'm
giving people something that's not out
there kind of realism and I think a lot
of people are inwardly very tired and
very sick of all the kind of codling
that goes on with readers and in our
culture where the people are try to you
know perpetuate this myth that it's all
about cooperation and getting along and
that business is kind of this world
where people are all on the same page
trying to create the best product
possible Etc and they kind of have the
same kind of illusions that I had and so
the kind of the harshness of the book
that you that first kind of shocked you
sort of excites people it appeals to
their Shadow side if you will you know
and that shadow side is very much
repressed in our culture and I think
artists and writers and people who
produce work that kind of vents some of
that shadow some of those darker
emotions that people have it has a very
attracting pull on them so I think
that's part of the reason because
there's there's a kind of a notoriety
around the book people almost feel like
it's something naughty when they have it
and so I think that's part of the appeal
of it so I have a friend he's a really
good friend of mine and I've known him
since I was in college and he's a tough
guy I mean he grew up in a a under
rather poverty-stricken
circumstances in Northern Alberta really
on a frontier piece of land like it had
only been broken 50 years before by his
father who was a long shoreman and an
ex-military guy good guy his father but
this guy grew up and he is tough he
worked in lead smelters and he wandered
around western Canada he was my roommate
when I went to college and is still a
good friend of mine and he ended up
working with like delinquents he went
into Social Work oddly enough and and he
ended up working with some of the worst
delinquents in in Canada and he's a
really good guy and he likes to help
people get better but he isn't naive at
all and then part of the reason that he
was good at working with the delinquent
was because there were no tricks they
could get up to that he couldn't see
right through and that was part because
he had a real integrated Shadow I mean
I'll give you an example of him so one
day in I was living in this town called
Grand Prairie and was at the height of
the oil boom and so it was a rough town
and there were lots of rough bars in it
and lots of young men in there with
plenty of money and plenty they come in
for you know three days after being out
minus 40 weather working on the oil rigs
and they were ready to party man and we
had a party one night and this kind of
frat house that I went to college in and
about oh way too many people showed up
and some of them were real troublemakers
and one we had a table that was pretty
full of beer bottles and vodka bottles
and so forth and one guy just went over
like tore the leg off and knocked the
table over and then a bunch of us got
together and chased them all out and
this friend of mine he said Oh They'll
be back and so he went upstairs and he
put on some steel to cowboy boots it was
just like a bloody Western he come
marching down the stairs and just as he
entered the living room there was a big
knock on the front door it was these
Hooligans coming back to cause grief and
he he just didn't break stride he opened
the door he pulled open the door and
there was a guy standing there ready to
fight and he kicked them underneath the
chin with his steel tool cowboy boot
knocked him right over the the front
porch and you know and the battle was on
but that was exactly what he was like
you know I mean and he had his shadow
was integrated you could he was a great
roommate he he reciprocated everything I
always knew if I bought groceries one
week he'd buy it the next like he was a
straight shooter you could trust him but
he was not naive man and that made him
able to deal with delinquents and to
help them so that's part of that
integration of that shadow yeah um I I
go very deeply into the shadow in in a
chapter in my last book the laws of
human nature and I try and talk about
how one integrates the shadow because
it's not it's not an easy answer for
that you know people are kind of
perplexed well I have this dark side and
I explain a lot of where it comes from
and how a lot of your aggressive
impulses like the room of two-year-olds
that you were talking about you have
that as well I'm talking to the people
that my readers you have that
aggressiveness when you were young and
it got socialized out of you and then it
got kind of got repressed and it's like
a lost self that lives inside of you and
it's screaming to come out how do you
integrate it and so the main thing is
you have to be aware that you have this
Shadow side you have you can't run away
from it you have to acknowledge that it
exists you almost have to embrace it in
way a good parent too does everything he
or she can not to repress that like what
you want to do with children is you want
to like you want them to be forceful you
want them to have some power you want
them to integrate that that capacity for
aggression into let's say Lucid
conversation you want them to be able to
stand up for themselves in family
discussions if you just punish them for
being aggressive let's say for talking
back or something like that you don't gu
that into more sophisticated development
you see this in schools too now you know
when my kids went to school this was so
dumb I we had a rule in our house which
was you don't have to follow stupid
rules that's a good rule but if you get
caught you have to put up with
consequences but right so one rule was
the school had not only could you not
throw
snowballs you couldn't make them and so
they were trying to yeah exactly you
should shake your head that's for sure
and like because their answer and this
was all politically correct nonsense you
know non-competitive games we're only
going to play non-competitive games it's
like first of all you know I studied
psj yeah a hockey game is not
competitive exactly because in a hockey
game well everybody no one brings a
basketball everybody plays hockey so
that's cooperation and then on the team
you have to cooperate and like if you're
the star but you never pass you're just
a dumb son of a [__] you're not the
star and so there's tremendous amount of
cooperation in all those competitive
games they're integrated and this idea
that you know you children better by not
allowing them to be competitive it's so
it's disgusting it is it's that well
that's the Freudian devouring mother
right that's oh well everyone's safe and
no one's going to ever hurt anyone and
that's kind of where a lot of young
people you know they enter the world
where they've been coddled where they
think that there are no winners that
everyone is you know it's just win-win
situations and that's where they get
really shocked by the realities of the
world so all this codling and this idea
that there doesn't have to be a winner
we don't have to get prizes for first
place everybody should get a prize you
know all you're doing is setting your
your children up for for massive uh you
know shocks when they enter the world
and they see that it's not like that
yeah and then they get disillusioned and
depressed you know or traumatized by I
mean when my my son's hockey team in his
school they won the the city
Championship which was a big deal you
know and the school was pretty happy
about that to to his credit so was the
coach but the principal who was this
authoritarian empath she was an awful
person I thought authoritarian empath
empath Yeah well yeah she used virtue as
a club oh it was yeah well there's
plenty of those people around she said
well really today we're all winners and
and the coach had the yeah exactly no it
is sickening cuz it and you know my son
was just a but but the coach had enough
guts he said no no the the hockey team
won and it's not like the kids in the
school were jealous some of them were
obviously but most of them are really
happy like you are when your sports team
wins that you know and most people are
generous enough so that they're able to
celebrate someone else's Victory without
and that's the same I saw this with
birthday parties I just bloody well
hated this it's like well every child
gets a gift bag it's like no you know
they have their damn birthday every
child doesn't need a damn gift bag and
this is this same this same naive trly
and it's authoritarian too because it
imposes this kind of view of the world
it's like no it's this kid's day to be
special that's why we're celebrating
this kid the rest of them if they can't
take that it's like it there's something
wrong with the way that they've been
treated and attended to well a lot of my
books I try to remove the kind of taboo
or the negative associations we have
with the word like power or with the
word ambition you know I try and say
ambition is a good thing it means that
you have you believe in yourself you you
you have some self-love and you believe
you're worth something and you want to
go out and Achieve and and create
something worthwhile for other people so
ambition is a is a positive thing but so
many people are just kind of embarrassed
about being a human being embarrassed
about our primate nature embarrassed
about our own aggressive impulses this
is partly why boys are failing in our
schools now at a disproportionate rate
you know the the and I see this there's
an assault of the sort that you're
describing on the better part of
striving masculinity and you know I had
a friend who killed himself because he
identified his ambition with you know
the the the patriarchal Force that's
devouring the environment let's say and
that's a con that's you know the cause
of of historical horror and you might
say well no one takes that onto
themselves to that degree and that's
well you can say that but that you just
don't know what the hell you're talking
about people take that on to themselves
all the time and then they they start to
identify the best part of them that
strives forward with the destructive
impulses of humanity and they're so
ashamed because they can't do anything
good then but in principle yeah you know
he tried to be as inoffensive and
harmless in every possible way as he
possibly could and it just sucked all
the life out of well you end up turning
that aggressive energy on yourself is
what ends up happening and that's maybe
leads to Suicide the ultimate kind of
self-aggression I know that I personally
have as I said I definitely have a
shadow side I'm very aggressive and
extremely competitive and I have a lot
of anger so a lot of that those
experiences in my youth made me very
angry but the way I kind of integrated
my shot I'm not saying this is a model
but the way I integrated it was through
my books yeah so I kind of that anger
kind of seeps through the material that
I write and I find I can only write when
I have that of anger but I don't rant I
don't yell and kind of put people down I
kind of Channel it into something
productive and something creative and so
I definitely do that when I'm lecturing
you know and people have commented you
know some of the people who've
criticized me that I'm an angry person
and which isn't true but it's definitely
that anger that capacity for anger
definitely is something that gives you
force and it push and anger definitely
so psychophys logically so imagine that
this is obviously a thought experiment
but imagine you're chasing a cat with a
broom well the cat's going to run from
the broom but if you Corner the cat with
the broom it will attack you even though
it's just a cat well and the reason for
that is that fear will facilitate either
freezing or Escape right but sometimes
fear isn't the right response and anger
will suppress fear and so one of the
tools that we have at our disposal
psychologically is anger as a antidote
to the terror that would otherwise
freeze you and you can integrate that
you know that's you know if you if you
have some justifiable moral outrage
let's say something really annoys you or
or or or I shouldn't say that deeply
violates your sense of moral propriety I
don't mean trivial things then the fact
of that forceful response can motivate
you to do things well it does for
lecture but certainly to
write a l energy to write man you need
all those sources of energy if you're
going to be able to do it just even to
turn it on yourself to discipline
yourself you know it's like I had to
grab myself by the Scruff of the neck
when I was a young guy to sit down sit
down godamn it and right you know and
and there's a force that's necessary to
especially if you're open because you're
all over the place if you're creative to
to get yourself to sit down and
focus yes that's right yeah and um
you know some of that anger you know I
think Young talks about this is that
that dark side contains a lot of energy
it contains a lot of power those
two-year-olds are kicking and screaming
that's all this kind of force behind it
and when you sort of are ashamed of it
and you push that down you're kind of
getting rid of an incredible well of
energy that you can use for your
creativity for your work etc you can
take that energy like you say and create
discipline out of it do something
creative out of it support some cause
that you really believe in you know so
that shadow side when you when you deny
it only negative things will happen and
and it is extremely important for people
to First recognize it in themselves you
know and it's it's very hard for a lot
of people to do that well I found like I
said earlier the one of the best ways in
there is resentment you watch yourself
like well because if you're if you're
resentful you know you're feeling like
you're being victimized and mistreated
it's like okay well you might maybe you
are okay and you think there's no anger
in that resentments you're not looking
hard enough you watch your fantasies for
example if you're resentful and you
watch the fantasies that flip through
your imagination like you might not want
to attend to them because they can be so
brutal right but but that the F because
if someone is is oppressing you
genuinely and you're not standing up for
yourself then there'll be these
compensatory fantasies yeah so one day
I'll tell you a story about that so one
day I was I'd been renovating my house
and it took a long time and the
neighbors this house was a complete
derel and it was a semi detached like
really a derel it hadn't been touched
since like 1927 had gas fittings in the
Upper Floor needed to be completely
gutted and so we gutted it and my
daughter got sick at exactly the same
time really sick and so it was it was
stressful and difficult and the
neighbors just they called the city on
us they they did everything they could
to make difficult even though they were
attached to us and wanted to sell their
house so we probably added like $25,000
to the value of their house because it
was no longer attached to a der and then
just as we were finishing my sister and
her husband came to visit and I was
making tea for them and I closed the
cupboard so it click and the neighbors
banged on the wall and then that night I
couldn't sleep and I had this I had
really been pushed to my limit by these
people and I had these Visions in my
mind of burning the damn place down and
I thought oh man if you're starting to
think about burning the place down you
you should probably go say something so
I took put on my Park and I went outside
about 6:00 in the morning and I just
waited for them to come out they never
did but I went knocked over on the door
and I said uh I was making tea for my
sister last night and I closed the
cupboard you didn't happened to bang on
the wall because you heard my cupboard
closing did you and they said yeah and I
said okay look if you bug me anymore I'm
going to cause you so much trouble you
cannot possibly imagine it yeah and I
meant it it was like because I knew it
was brewing in the back of my mind
because I was done it was like you want
a war you have no idea what you're
getting into and so they backed into the
kitchen and like two hours later they
came over and said oh you know we're
sorry and we won't do it again and but
like I what we did was the mistake you
talk about we backtracked continually
trying to pleased them you know and
every time they complained we did what
they wanted because we assumed we were
dealing with reasonable people but we
weren't and the only way to stop them
was with a show of force it was like you
want to be malevolent you want to play
that game it's like okay no problem but
right you know and things went more
smoothly after that and and that's a
good example of well paying attention to
those fantasies cuz I thought I better
like deal with this straightforwardly
otherwise I'm likely to do something
stupid right that's the other thing you
got to watch if that builds up inside
you exactly yeah and a lot of times I
look at people in in the public eye who
get caught doing something really stupid
like you say and their first thing will
be well that wasn't me that did it I
don't know what came over me that's not
that's not who I am but that is exactly
who you are that is a person who has
been carrying this resentment and this
kind of inner anger but not acting upon
and then suddenly they do something
really stupid like having an affair with
a 21y old or or you know they just
caught doing something yeah so I I I
watch people with their their children a
lot hey yeah and so when my son was a
pretty assertive kid and tough like he
had a real will and uh you know when he
was 9 months old and starting to crawl
around I taught him what no meant and no
what no means is stop doing that or
something you don't like will happen to
you that's what no means right and so
when he was 9 months he was starting to
take books off shelves and get into the
plants and so on and because he was
starting to crawl around and so to teach
him what no meant I just grab his leg
when he wasn't doing something that he I
didn't want him to do and you know he
would squawk and [__] and complain and
I'd say no no no and I just hold him
until he gave up and sometimes he would
cry and the reason he was cried is cuz
he was frustrated and angry that I was
mucking about with him it's like fair
enough he wanted to go explore and you
know fair enough kid you want to explore
but you can't tear out the plant and get
dirt all over the rug and you can't go
into the electrical cords you know like
no and no and
so I had done a lot of Behavioral
training by that time and by the time I
did that for say six or seven days and
soon as if I just said no he would just
stop and sometimes he would cry and then
the week later if I said no he'd just
stop so it took like two weeks e and
then then I knew that if I said no he
would stop and so then I could let him
explore I could give him a lot of
freedom and then I'd have people come
over to my house with their 2-year-old
or three-year-old and because they had
never taught the child what no meant
they never gave because they didn't want
to impose on their freedom let's say
they couldn't give the child any freedom
at all they had to wander around behind
them all the time because they never
knew what the child was going to get
into and so then you start to hate your
child right because instead of having a
bit of free time and just being able to
say no to this kid while he's playing
around on his own and giving him some
Freedom you're just non-stop monitoring
this child and you're mad cuz you don't
have a life and we had another couple
come over and they had two kids that
were like four and five and they were
just horrible we sat down to eat we
wanted to have a conversation and we put
a basket of bread out and the kids just
grabbed the bread and they ate all the
centers out of the bread and the parents
were all embarrassed about it and but
they didn't do anything to stop it and
you know in their minds they thought
well aren't we permissive and nice and
we never say no to our CH children but
they didn't notice that they actually
hated their children because how could
you go to someone's house and you want
to have a conversation you just met them
and your children embarrass you to death
and you think you're not going to get
resentful about that right and you think
you're not going to take and so here's
how people would take it out on their
kids so imagine that happens now you go
home and you're pissed right off but
you're not going to let yourself know
that because you're such a nice person
then your child goes off and draws a
picture maybe they put a lot of work
into it e then they come running up to
show you and that's a real good time to
give them a pad on the head and say look
isn't that great but you're pissed off
because you were embarrassed and so you
look at it and you think uh and that's
all you have to do it's like that's not
really worthy of my attention you don't
have to say anything mean you just have
to not attend in this manner and then
you got your revenge and you think you
won't do that man you know nothing about
yourself and you know you read in the
paper sometimes these mothers or fathers
they do something brutal to a child and
I know what that I know how that happens
it's like no disciplinary strategies in
the house the kid is driving the mother
or father crazy you know and then maybe
the mother or father they're hung over
one day and maybe they just broke up
with their boyfriend or girlfriend maybe
they got you know hell at from their
boss who's a tyrant and they haven't
stood up to them and the kid does the
wrong thing at exactly the wrong time
and maybe he's actually pretty good at
that by then and it's like out comes
Satan himself
yeah and all hell breaks loose it's like
I wouldn't do that it's like yeah
there's almost nothing you wouldn't do
you just don't know yourself very well
yeah yeah well the abil the ability to
set limits and to say no and to tell
people that you know it's not right for
you to bang on my house at this hour and
etc etc etc that takes a little bit of
toughness on your part A you have to be
kind of willing to put yourself on the
line maybe that person will get angry
and hit you or something or maybe the
war will escalate but you have to be
willing to take that risk because if you
don't then they then you set No Limits
and who knows what they'll end up doing
but a lot of this
permissiveness is people are just
basically afraid they're afraid of any
kind of Confrontation yeah they're
afraid of any kind of conflict and
through conflict and confrontation is
how you actually grow it's actually how
you develop as a person hey so here's a
cool stat this is really interesting man
so there's been some great work on what
predicts what behavioral markers predict
divorce in couples's counseling really
solid work okay so here's one predictor
if when the couple is talking in front
of a therapist and one of them or the
other or both roll their eyes there's
like a 95% chance they're going to be
divorced within six months and that's
contempt okay they've got so they've
become so discom connected because they
don't communicate because the resentment
has built up that they now have contempt
for each other but here's here's another
cool fact from that research so if you
have people track the number of positive
and negative interactions with their
partner you can calculate ratios and
then you can see what the ratio is that
that lends itself to the successful
maintenance of a
relationship and so you might think well
the more positive interactions the
better and that's kind of true so if it
falls below five positive to one
negative the relationship is in danger
but if it rises you have five to one and
you can kind of see that CU you know
negative events are more memorable and
and and more powerful than positive ones
and so you know that if you read YouTube
comments you know but if it rises above
11 to one the relationship is also in
danger and you could imagine that what
you want in a relationship is well you
want support and love and you want most
of your interactions to be positive but
you want your partner to slap you down
then when you're being stupid right
because and then if they don't outcomes
your or Tyrant right you're just going
to dominate them if they don't push back
and so if you have any sense too if you
have a partner you want to encourage
them to put limits on you you know
especially if they're a little more
timid than you temperamentally it's like
you don't want to run rough shot over
them because they know some things you
don't right so cool that it's above 11
to1 so that means to Too Much positivity
is also is the death no for a
relationship and you know you want
someone with some spark right it's like
well what if I push you a little bit
even teasing yeah you want the P per
person to be able to push back a bit and
you have to be able to accept it as well
because some people probably in those
situations can't stand any kind of
criticism they're they're so fragile
that if the other person pushes back it
kind of escalates into a battle so so
real strength comes from the ability in
a relationship or any kind of Rel
intimate or otherwise is the ability to
take that kind of criticism to actually
welcome it when people set Li limits for
you and tell you that this kind of
behavior is wrong and then you can
evaluate and assess yourself yeah unless
you want to repeat it stupidly forever
right I mean that that's the alternative
in a relationship is I don't like
conflict I've been in plenty of
conflicts like plenty way more than is
reasonable but I don't like them like
I I well I meet people now and then I
went to talk to Douglas Murray in in New
York City about a week ago and we were
talking about conflict and he said you
know he he doesn't mind to fight and
I've met lots of people like that that
you know they like that combativeness
and I don't really but what I really
hate is deferred conflict that escalates
it's like it's better to get it over
with now and you're a fool if you think
that running away from it is going to
you know like if if someone cuts you off
in traffic and they're obviously really
angry it's probably better just to get
the hell out of there because you're
never going to see that person again you
know and you don't want a situation like
that to escalate
because they might have a gun or
whatever well yeah you don't just don't
know what's up with them they're really
strangers yeah but you know if you're
dealing with someone day in and day out
and they're pushing on the top of your
head to stop you from growing which I
think Lucy used to do to lus in the
peanuts cartoons they had a dark side
those cartoons man they Comics they sure
did yeah yeah they would be canceled now
probably yeah could now I don't think
yeah I think that's right yeah because a
lot of characters Lucy was actually not
a likable character at all right and she
she was really oppressive to lonus who
was a good character yeah yeah yeah good
humor always has an edge but yeah that
that you don't get rid of
your the negative part of yourself
especially that aggressive part by
pretending it doesn't exist that that
quite the contrary that just doesn't
work at
all right yeah I'm sorry you gonna say
something I was just going to ask you
about your new I wanted to ask you about
working with 50 Cent and the rappers and
I wanted to ask you about your new book
too so let's start with so how did this
partnership with 50 Cent come
about well um the book was very popular
with rappers um as I said because of the
nature of the music
industry and um he reached out to me he
wanted to meet me because the 48 Laws
power was sort of his Bible as he
expressed it so I met him in New York um
kind of in the back room of the
steakhous it was sort of like a
something straight out of The Godfather
I was kind of the one white guy amongst
his whole group there I was a little bit
intimidated to be honest I didn't know
what to expect because he has his
reputation ended up he was really nice
and really interesting actually very
kind of sweet guy not what you expect
and we we I just finished writing my
book on warfare and strategy which is
kind of my version of ssu's Art of War
how to strategize and conflict sort of
like what you're talking about and he
has a very strategic mind and he got we
got very we kind of had a really nice
connection and I thought you know so
much in our culture is creating these
stupid kind of Divisions and walls like
you're in Academia you only write
academic books you're a popular person
you only write popular books you know
you come from this community you come
from that community and they you never
communicate and I thought it would be
very interesting to write a book coming
from two opposite um backgrounds you
know me
middle class Jewish boy from Los Angeles
and him from Southside
Queens something interesting could
happen from a collaboration there's not
enough of that in our culture I believe
because even though our our
circumstances were very different our
minds were very similar we were thinking
on a similar plane that kind of
transcended these sort of superficial
differences so I spent time with him and
I was trying to figure out what is the
essence of his power what makes him such
a compelling figure and made him not one
of those people in Southside Queens who
ended up kind of spiraling downward
ending up in prison what saved him and I
determined that the quality he had was
this kind of
fearlessness and it isn't the kind of
fearlessness where you go beating people
up or something it's kind of an inner
strength he had been shot when he was
like 20 years old like nine bullets
right there through a car window um kind
of L one of them bullets lodged in his
mouth and he survived miraculously and
it gave him this kind of calmness like I
have nothing to fear I almost died Bring
it on I don't really care and so I I
observed him in meetings I observed that
kind of calmness and how he could take
over a meeting not by being super
aggressive but just by having this kind
of dominant Persona and I thought that
there's tremendous power in this
fearlessness not being afraid to be
different not being afraid to have
conflict and confrontation not being
afraid of of actually um of death itself
not being afraid of the reality of your
situation on and on so the book that we
formed together was kind of a meditation
on 10 forms of fearlessness and I found
you know I I thought that I was a
relatively Fearless person which in some
ways I am I seem agreeable but I'm
actually in some ways a little bit bold
and adventurous and but compared to him
I realized no I'm actually riddled with
fear
and just being around him and kind of
writing the book helped me a lot in my
you know kind of overcome some of my own
limits and some of my own fears so
that's where that book came yeah it's
nice to have a model like that really
close by right to contrast yourself with
yeah you can learn a lot from so do you
think you think that fearlessness that
you saw in him you think part of that
was a consequence of that brush with
death how much of that do you think was
temperamental
too in him well well there's there's
there's a kind of a reckless
fearlessness that a lot of people from
the hood have which doesn't really serve
them very well and it gets them in a lot
of trouble right he has a very kind of
strategic in in under control
fearlessness hey I got something cool to
tell you about that so I was talking to
um David
bus yes I believe it and he's an
evolutionary psychologist a good one
we're talking about this uh maavalan
personality tribe the dark Triad the Del
poos UBC yeah okay so here's something
really
interesting um it's the bad boy Paradox
they call it that young naive women are
attracted to those maavalan
types but when they get older and more
experience they start to be able to see
through that the reason they're
attracted to it as far as I can tell and
I talked about this with bus to see if I
was way off on the wrong track is that
those Reckless Fearless people
mimic real Fearless competence and young
women aren't good at distinguishing
between the two and so they get sucked
in by the sort of Psychopathic
recklessness because they think it's
Fearless competence and then of course
the guys who are doing that they'll
they'll prey on that because they're
trying to ape competence but what the
women are really after in their heart of
hearts they might be out for an
adventure too because there's that
element of it but they want that
fearlessness that does go along with
true generosity and competence and also
the ability to keep you know real
darkness away so well a lot of those
people who display that kind of U what
you call mimicking fearlessness or
whatever Macho that's the Macho they're
actually hiding the opposite they're
actually very very riddled with
insecurities they're not you know and
they're they're they kind of create this
sort of bravado in this false front and
they go to an extreme to kind of project
this machismo when in fact they're
riddled with insecurities and that's
their way of dealing with it but someone
like 57 he was very he's very
comfortable with himself he knows who he
is he knows where he came from his
mother was a hustler on the streets so
he knew the limits of the game and I
don't know I think there is maybe a
slight genetic component to it I can't
really put my finger on it why he was
able to have this kind of self- control
where other people yeah well that that
to mention neuroticism you know if if
you're in a rough environment and you're
low in neuroticism that's pretty damn
helpful because imagine that what
neuroticism is unit of
psychophysiological uh upset caused per
unit of stress yeah and some or unit of
danger and some people overreact and
some people underreact sometimes the
overreaction saves your life sometimes
the underreaction gets you killed so
it's not like there's a clear answer so
there's variability there some people
are much more calm not volatile they
don't withdraw temperament
that's a more masculine temperament by
the way I agree but if you if you're
raised in a really rough environment and
you happen to be emotionally stable
that's the opposite of neurotic let's
say then you're just not going to be as
affected by it and that can be a real
blessing so and then I'm also interested
in that you know you said that you
channeled a lot of your Shadow let's say
into creativity did you see the same
thing happening with 50 Cent Oh my God
his music is incredibly aggressive and
that's and and and to an extent that's
kind of violent and I must admit it
really appeals to me so um when I was
why why why that's cool because it's so
interesting that so many rap fans are
young white guys I know I know yeah yeah
but that's that's really psychologically
interesting right because if if they've
been coddled and their ambition has been
squatched and everything about them
that's aggressive has been shamed out of
existence it's that's part of that
attraction of that Dark Fantasy right
then they see that aggression
manifesting itself and in a creative
form in rap it's not surprising that
they're going to try to imitate that
it's part of that AB that desire to
bring that shadow out of the shadows and
into the
light well I I I wasn't really um I was
a little bit different in that um I kind
of understand you know my own anger I
wasn't so much coddled but but what I
really enjoyed about the his music is it
just seemed very real and and kind of
the the beat kind of catches you up in a
primal sense and kind of the
aggressiveness just seems very direct
and very refreshing by the way and you
could tell you know I say in in my book
Mastery that by a person's Style by how
they write a book by by how they put
language together or the music they
create reveals something very very deep
about their character about who they are
and so a lot of rap kind of comes across
this sort of faults like someone is
trying really hard to have that kind of
Thug Persona and it's not real but it it
really smelled authentic with him and
the fact that he'd been shot and nearly
died you know just kind of added to that
aura but there was something very real
about it and very authentic in a culture
where so much isn't real I think that
was the deep deep appeal in a primal
sense of 50s music and when I was
writing the war book I was trying to get
myself into Marshall mood to write it I
would actually listen to his music to
kind of put me in the mood to write some
of the
chapters that in B that in bethoven what
what what do you like from what what
bethoven do you like what what pumped
you up well when I was a kid one of the
first albums I was first kind of raised
on classical music then I got into jazz
and rock and everything but I got a
collection of his nine Symphonies and
God there's there's a kind of a an
aggression and violence like to the
Fifth Symphony in the n Symphony it just
kind of you know like they used
Clockwork
Orange there's something so
overwhelmingly powerful about it right
it just you the coral section in the
ninth is like that it's so Joy yeah and
it's so isn't that so interesting that
the Ode to Joy has that Primal
aggressive force and it it makes Joy it
makes joy is you know in in the naive
sense it's well you're happy it's like
no This Joy is that integrated terrible
power that you definitely hear in uh
superb music yeah yeah so when when that
when that Coral bit kicks in it's just
overwhelming it's like a blow and makes
you tingle it's it's so exciting and
I've heard it maybe thousand times since
then it still affects me the same way
and now when I'm driving somewhere and I
have to get myself in the mood I'll
still put the night Symphony on and some
of the other yeah it's like it's like
encountering the terrible force of good
you know you think about Moses and the
bird Bush it's or or or Jacob wrestling
with God it's like well why is it a
burning bush why is it terrifying why do
you wrestle with God why do you get hurt
it's like well because good in its full
force has this unbelievable what has
this integration of power and it's no
wonder it terrifies people because it
just burns everything away in
comparison right right yeah I mean um a
lot of the the new book that I'm writing
about which is the sublime is is I'm
talking about it's a combin comination
of two emotions of of both kind of pain
and pleasure of excitement and fear at
the same time um so you're confronting
something that kind of intimidates you
but is so awesome that you can't you
know you're just overwhelmed and the
Confluence of two emotions opposing
emotions at the same time is very very
powerful for a human being yeah I've
just written a book that I'm going to
publish next year that's called an ABC
of Hood tragedy and it's a combination
of dark humor and Beauty it's the same
we're trying to we're experimenting with
exactly the same thing those that
paradoxical justos of dark and light
emotions there is something Sublime
about that that's and something a
inspiring about that it's I guess it's
it's part of bringing what's dark into
the light or subsuming it under the
light maybe so why do you get why the
sublime what are you pursuing there and
well the reason um you know the the
ultimate in Sublime is is to me so the
way I look at it is being a human being
and being socialized is a kind of a
world there's a limit a circle that we
have to live inside certain codes and
conventions that we have to abide by and
we all do that and the codes and
conventions for fifth century BC China
are not the same as what we have now but
there's still that limit and what humans
are attracted to what lies beyond that
limit it's just part of our nature it's
aers part of it and when we explore
beyond the social limits and codes and
things we're supposed to do and ways
we're supposed to act it's deeply
exciting and thrilling there's also that
element of fear involved right see I
think that's a better that's a better
what would you call it formulation than
n's idea of Will To Power is the desire
to exist on that Sublime Edge and that
is the the the the border between Order
and Chaos that you're describing right
you want you want and the thing and that
is the source of meaning itself I mean
that's why I think music is so powerful
is because it plays with predictable
forms but continually adds that level of
unpredictability a beautiful you know
how in any kind of music the simplest
music someone who's good at it country
music you know there'll be a key shift
or a twang on the string or something
that or something discordant yes exactly
and and then and integrated within a
sort of a higher uh what a higher unity
and it's deeply meaningful it puts you
on that edge of the sublime and and and
we are we do Find the meaning that helps
sustain us in life exactly at that place
that's that's something more deeply real
than anything else well so and and so
the ultimate thing beyond that limit is
is death itself and the word sublime
means up to the threshold of a door or
sublemon lemon being the limit right
like
Su and so um I I've been meaning to
write this book for 15 years and I got
distracted but then about three years
ago I nearly died myself I had a stroke
and um I came you know just an inch away
from dying myself I was driving my car
and so some of the experience the
near-death experience and what it kind
of taught me and how it sort of remained
with me three years later and how I kind
of feel it in my bones and how it's
altered how I look at the world and
everything around me is to me the kind
of the ultimate Sublime experience so
now unfortunately I'm able to write
about this in a way that's actually very
personal and experiential instead of
just purely
intellectual and why unfortunately
because of the price you had to pay for
it yeah the price is I can't take a walk
I can't do the swim I can't do the
things that I used to love so you know
I'm kind of I can I can you know I'm
functional I can walk around the house
but I can't take a hike and I can't do
my longdistance swimming or my mountain
biking or anything like that so I I pay
a price but I'm
alive well and then but so interesting
that that was it was in the aftermath of
that devastating experience that you
decided to turn particularly to the
sublime yeah well it's because I've been
wanting to write the book for a long
time and I knew that it has to do a
little bit with the feeling of death you
know um and I don't understand that so
why that why make that as I'm not
disputing it I don't I just don't
understand like I mean you talked also
about 50 cents brush with death but yeah
why does the sublime in your estimation
why is it tangled up with the with the
idea of death well because there's
there's a li that that limit and
experiencing the limit gives you that
sense of excitement and fear at the same
time well death is the ultimate limit
and to have gone up to that door and
glimpsed to the other side and literally
felt it in your bones and literally feel
your bones melting away as you kind of
go into a coma you know is like I went
up to that door I actually peered inside
of it now other people have had much
stronger near-death experiences mine was
more of the milder sort but still I peed
as far as as far as near-death
experiences go relatively minor well you
know my my coma my coma lasted an hour
or something some people been up there
Ah that's nothing man experts have Comas
for like three
years well okay all right um I could
have had a you know a more intense
near-death experience but it was pretty
intense
it sounds like it was
sufficient it is but so the sense of
life is almost too much it's
overpowering in its immediacy and we
humans try and kind of dull the the the
the razor edge so much so that we can
live but if you think about you know
your mortality on a day-to-day basis and
if you try and actually experience the
immediacy of life and how dangerous it
actually is and how it's fraught with
all of these these you know these these
things that you don't want to confront
is is very very very powerful and I'm
sorry Seri just keeps hearing me
so so annoying so um you know it creates
so when you have that it's it's like the
ultimate it's a mix of you know they
they call in French the
orgasm right right so an orgasm is
almost like a little death
you know so that sense of it's almost
too much it's almost like death itself
like something so pleasurable can
actually kind of morph into something a
little bit frightening as well something
a little bit like you're like you're
exploring something that you're not
supposed to oh you see that in the ease
in which laughter and tears can be
interchanged right you see that with
children they can switch from laughter
to tears and no time and you know you
can laugh so hard that you cry and it's
often too when you're crying about
something sorrowful that someone can say
something funny and it'll switch to
laughter that's all way down at the
level of instinct right where these
right it's so interesting to see the
Opposites touch at that level yeah so so
the reason why I doing the elini
Mysteries just to bring that back is uh
I have a chapter on Pagan religions on
what I call the Pagan Sublime and I'm
trying to tell the reader that it we
don't have a right conception of ancient
religions they're actually very
different from what we think we have
these kind of cliche Notions of kind of
mischievous gods cavorting in clouds and
doing all kinds of naughty things that
are very human and just kind of almost a
silliness to it like whoa we're so
beyond that but actually Pagan religions
were extremely serious and they were
based on creating go away Sy and they
were they and they were based on um
creating very powerful emotional
responses and people and that was what
Primal religion was about or ancient
religion was about it wasn't based on
texts on Dogma on the written word so
the elini Mysteries because there are
Mysteries because nobody ever wrote
about it there's no text there's nothing
written that we can go to yes there's
the hymn to Demeter that kind of maybe
describes a little bit of what it's
based on but we don't know really what
happened because nothing was ever
written down it was simply about
creating this overwhelming emotional
reaction in which you took the the
initiates to the edge of death you made
them experience death in life which is
the story of demer and pany you were
like making them feel as if they had
gone into the underworld itself and that
created a whole new relationship to life
but I wanted to this idea that religion
isn't this kind of milk toasty thing
that people think about nowadays it was
initially extremely powerful reaction to
human vulnerability to our weakness in
this immense Cosmos with all of these
very powerful forces and the religious
rituals were to actually mirror that and
give you a kind of compensatory sense
that you could control it you could
contain it within these kind of powerful
experiences oh it's really interesting
to me that you know you've you've come
through your analysis of the
darkness and then a consequence of that
was to be motivated to pursue the
sublime you know it's in the little
stamp that I'm using for these kids book
which I'm doing with this illustrator
named Juliet fogra who's a real genius
in my estimation we made a stamp and the
motto on the stamp is through the
darkness into the light and W you know
and there's this old idea that if you
look into the darkness enough you'll
find something that compensates for it
right that emerges out of the darkness
that's greater and more powerful than
the darkness and that part part of the
looking into the dark side of you
yourself is you find the power that
enables you to deal with mortality and
there is something Sublime about that
it's so cool but you know all your work
investigating and trying to integrate
the shadow has led you to this to this
what what what that your intuition has
been gripped by the idea of the
sublime is necessarily where you'd think
you'd end
up well yeah a lot of the um impetus for
the book is another little bit of anger
as well because I always have to have
some anger in order to feel the you know
the impulse to write and dis discipline
myself and my anger now is about about
how people's worlds have become so tight
and so banal and so limited where
they're just kind of Disappearing into
their phones and their world is is just
sort of programmed for them by by
Facebook or social media and they're
sort of told what they're supposed to
think and they're kind of programmed and
at the same time you know what science
is discovering about the universe and
about where we live and about who we are
is just so insanely mindblowing just
absolutely almost Inc it's Sublime in my
opinion and yet so many people are just
living like as if they're sleepwalking
is if that you know I talk in in one
chapter about the unlikeliness of any of
us being alive any of us actually being
here right now on Earth and how just to
just to be who we are the odds against
it are like8 trillion to one I mean even
more than that and but people aren't
thinking about this they're they're not
aware of the
awesomeness of just the fact of being
alive of the cosmos as it evolved as as
things on earth evolve the way they are
and so I'm kind of I'm kind of angry uh
a little bit about how about how people
are just not aware of this not well that
anger again that's you know one of the
things I did as a clinician is to help
people find their purpose was to to help
them find out what they're angry about
it's like well what's your problem you
know you say that someone what's your
problem but actually you want to know
it's like cuz if you have a problem then
because there's lots of things you could
be bothered about but you're not
bothered about by all of them right
there's something that stands out for
you as you know something that violates
your sense of moral propriety let's say
that's your problem you think well I
don't want to have a problem it's yes
you do you want to have your problem and
then you want to go try to solve it and
if you're looking for meaning in your
life it's like well what bugs you well
I'm annoyed at this and that and and you
know it's pretty naive and low
resolution and formulaic to begin with
but you could zero right in on that and
then you find the purpose of your life
and that's that's in that anger it's in
that anger at least to some
degree yeah and as I said I can't write
without it I don't know why every day I
have to feel a little bit a little bit
of pinch of it or like a little bit of
edge of that knife in me and and
sometimes yeah well you have to be
that's right I mean I find what I'm
sitting down to write a chapter cuz it's
hard to sit down and and write a chapter
it's a lot of work man and you know
writers always whine about that but it
is hard to it's hard to do it's as hard
as clinical work which is the hardest
work I ever did and so but I have to be
it's like there has to be a reason for
this you know to get me going to do it
it has to be important and that means it
has to be dealing with something weighty
and if it's weighty it's going to it's
going to act it's going to what what
it's going to call out of you all your
emotions responses including the well
certainly including anger certainly
that's a tremendous form of energy well
I don't know if you have the same
experience but I read so many books uh
from my research and that's the main
thing that I fault them with there
there's no kind of energy behind it
there's no human behind it there's no
voice that's kind of screaming out why
do they have to say this screaming out
is exactly right that's a great book
screams like Soulja niton gag
archipelago that's like 3,000 p
of screaming anger it's like you
sustained screaming anger for 3,000
Pages it's unbelievable it's
unbelievable it's like being caught in a
windstorm reading that book yeah and
that's no wonder that greatness is
terrifying yeah yeah and that's that's
kind of channeling the dark side in some
ways yeah definitely yeah well I mean
that man brought down a totalitarian
state at least in part it's like you
have to have a lot of force and you
think it's not going to be anger in part
to to push back against that's all that
kind of petty tyranny that you were
talking about in in its in its most what
would you say most rigidified and
Universal form and one man you know who
decided he was going to tell the truth
and and and and harnessed that passion
to his words changed the world yeah yeah
so I don't know if I'll have that kind
of effect I'm sure I won't but um that
sort of I I want people to I kind of
want to spark a sense of almost the
religious awe without an organized
religion behind it because I think um we
have changed a lot in thousands of years
but there's something in our nature that
kind of craves those kinds of
experiences and nothing in our culture
is providing it's the definition of
crave I don't think nothing music
does yeah music does man music does and
music was such a mystery for me when I
was a young psychologist like music is
Meaningful and you can't argue the
meaning away like it's invulnerable to
criticism isn't that so cool that
there's a source of meaning that's
invulnerable to criticism and then it's
this harmonious interplay of beautiful
patterns predictability and
unpredictability and and an integration
of passion and movement right cuz
because it compels movement you see
think of people dancing to estos Walts
right they're harmonizing in themselves
with the sublime patterns of the world
that's music it's something man and it's
no wonder young people are so desperate
for music because that's where we have
the sublime in our culture well that's
where they go to things like Raves or
astral world and concerts like that they
want that kind of collective experience
you know that you used to get from like
initiation rituals or kind of things in
in Pagan times I remember once I was in
um Nicaragua I was a journalist I was
covering the the Civil the revolution
the civil war going on and the pope was
visiting Nicaragua at the time it's 1984
I believe and there was
like 100,000 people crammed in this one
square and you know I'm not by any means
a sand denista I had no sympathy for
particularly as it is now but the
feeling was that I experienced I've
never experienced anything else like it
of that crowd and that group emotion it
can be frightening
too like well well that's it that's the
thing that Nazis were unbelievably good
at at pulling bringing that up right and
so you might say too that if we can't
figure out how to harness that force in
a positive way in our culture we pretend
it doesn't exist it's going to come up
in these underground ways because the
craving for it is so deep and the Nazis
were masters of spectacle and fire they
were really good at that sort of thing
and Orwell was courageous enough to
point that out he said well we don't
have anything with that power to combat
that terrible dramatic evil but you do
see it in a concert you do see it in
that in that Collective well you said
you saw it in relationship to the pope
and that's well hopefully that's
something good or at least it's
certainly a lot better than
nberg yeah and to think that we don't
need that or that that's just
Superstition that's
extra yeah I know I know I agree yeah
yeah well look it was really good
talking with you man very nice talking
to you I really enjoyed it these are
things I never get to cover in all of my
eight you know hundreds of interviews so
I'm very very grateful for I've explored
territory that I've never explored
before so thank you isn't that fun yeah
yeah usual experience for me yeah I I
enjoyed it a lot man yeah
sorry your maps of meaning was a very
important book for me I read it actually
to help me with my War Book Believe It
or Not Your notion of conflict
and integrating internal conflict and
external conflict so I just want to
thank you and let you know nobody knows
about that because I haven't really
spoken about it but that book was very
important for me thank you I'm amazed
you read it it's a hell of a slog that
book six 700 pages and I can't honestly
say I don't think I understood
everything in it at least at the time
but it was very amazing book well thank
you very much I'm glad to hear that and
yeah it took me I wrote that book it
took a lot of anger man I wrote that
book every day three hours a day every
day for 15 years Jesus yeah wow I I had
to put my hands around my neck and say
you sit God damn it you sit down write
this goddamn book I had to quit drinking
I had to quit having fun I know believe
me I know all about that it took me five
years to write my last book I can't
imagine what 13 years would be like but
yeah I know all about
that well good luck with your book on
the sublime I'm looking forward to it
let's talk again let's talk again when
it when well
but maybe when it comes out that would
be good I really like to and I'm really
curious about how you integrate your
investigation at eluc ucan mysteries I
talked to some interesting people about
that recently and I know I had already
written the piece when I heard them
speak and then I I changed some things
because I realized some things I written
were inaccurate but what I try to do in
that is I try and I I create a character
a woman who's going to the Mysteries and
what it was like from her first person
account it's fictional but I'm trying to
actually you know give her a history
during the the plague in the 1420s and
then going to the Mysteries and what it
would feel like subjectively to be in
there yeah I had a vision once that the
the shamanic experience was an antidote
to icy Northern
totalitarianism you know so many people
are going to the Jungle now to the
Amazon to use iasa and that sort of
thing and there's I mean and that
certainly that drug use that
hallucinogenic drug use was up with
those primordial religions in some way
we don't understand any of that even a
little bit no and of course the El
Mysteries probably had that drug element
as well because the drink they had was
either mushrooms or aot or or or Opium
poppy seeds poppy so yeah uh it's been
demonstrated that all kind of pagan
cultures had some kind of drug thing
going on and yeah so all right well good
luck to you writing this book and it was
pleas talking to you and I certainly am
much more clear about you everything
that you've been doing I'm so glad I
decided to talk to you and yeah me too
me too yeah I hope I brought a little
bit of clarity there oh absolutely it
was a really good discussion thanks
thanks again thanks again thank you so
much again say hello to your daughter
for me I will I will do that definitely
okay yeah she's a big fan and so as my
producer Eric oh Eric this Eric yes this
Eric I had no idea
hey Eric you can come in if you want
yeah big fan big big yeah well I was all
shorted out when I was reading uh the
daily laws I thought I I don't know what
to do with this it's like it's this what
the hell's going on here and Eric he
said well he really liked your books and
my daughter really liked your interview
and I thought well I'm obviously missing
missing something you know and I did I
didn't spend as much time when I was
deciding about this conversation reading
it to but I had some sense that maybe
you were doing a shadow investigation
but I clear about so but they were big
Defenders of you it's like that's you
got to talk to him thank you Eric thank
you I appreciate that of course yeah of
course anything I can do for you thank
you no AB Eric why were why were why
were these books helpful to you oh man
[__] good question uh that's tough um
there's been a few points in my life
where so I I I was a fighter that was my
first career choice I was a mixed
martial arts fighter um and and so to me
knowing like from reading the 48 Laws of
Power it's very similar to Jiu-Jitsu so
when I got into business it was like oh
I've seen this behavior before because
I've read this book and I understand
this so it started as like a a very
interesting it started just as an
interest like oh this seems cool I think
I saw you on Tim faris's show or
something like that um and and and when
I started to see those things come into
play it then like completely hooked me
and I got all the rest of the books um
and so it prepared you yes yeah and and
and one of the things Robert that I like
so much about what you're doing is
you're taking these principles you're
showing it throughout history and you're
giving examples of how this plays out
today and so it's like across the entire
spectrum of what type of thinker is
reading it yeah you have to be the type
of thinker that's going to read which
isn't everybody but across that Spectrum
everybody gets a little exactly what
they need to hear in it so it makes it
very practical you can then go off and
be very practical with it the same thing
that prct yeah yeah well it's really
important like one of the things you
learn as a cognitive behavioral
psychologist is that you have to nail
this down to changeable Behavior you
know one of the things I was always
doing with my clients was and I I've
recommended this to people many times in
my lectures is find find the largest
unit of change that you're actually
willing to do like maybe you won't clean
up your room I I stress that it's like
well will you move one thing off your
desk today one thing just one or if you
can't do that because sometimes clients
would come back and say I couldn't even
move one thing said well why don't you
look at one thing and think about moving
it and and they're embarrassed because
you know they're so unable to perform
this task which is a simple task in some
sense that they're ashamed to admit
where they are to themselves but they
can't move forward I had one client this
is so funny he lived at home with his
mother and he shouldn't he was too old
for that and his room was a complete
bloody catastrophe and he knew it and he
was probably mad at his mother for like
coddling him and and so he was needed to
vacuum the carpet so the deal for the
week was you go vacuum that carpet and
he brought the vacuum cleaner into his
room but he left it in the doorway like
on a slant and every day for a week he
had to walk over that vacuum cleaner he
wouldn't Mo put it back and he wouldn't
bring it in his room and and vacuum and
that's a good example of that
underground resentment just think how
angry you have to be at your situation
to put a vacuum cleaner you know was
probably a middle finger to me too it's
like I'm not doing what that goddamn
therapist says you know that kind of
resentment but he he literally walked
over that damn vacuum cleaner for a week
you know and we talked a bunch about
that it's like well what are you doing
it's like obviously you're angry like
why can't you do this what are you angry
about well man he he was angry about
plan of things let's put it that way so
yeah there that practicality that's real
necessary to nail the highest to the
lowest and to get all that organized all
the way down to practical
implementable with the work of Milton
Ericson
yes what you refer to specifically I
just all of his work I just I'm just
enamored with his work because his
ability to create change in his
patience and the strategies he would
employ I just think are so brilliant you
know I don't know I don't know if he's
respected in the field or not anymore
but I just thought his story well all
those my experience with all those great
clinicians was you're a fool if you
don't take what they knew seriously I
mean those people had a reputation for a
reason and there's you know I I really
learned a lot from the great
behaviorists I learned a lot from the
psychoanalysts from the rogerian types
like they all had their they all had
something to say the behaviorists were
great at decomposing something complex
into implementable units man and the
psychoanalysts were great at high level
conceptualization archetypal analysis
you know the big story big picture yeah
so hey Eric maybe we'll keep that
discussion with you in the video okay
yeah I like that yeah yeah sorry for
cursing right
away good that was perfect
[Music]